Add AI assistance notices (#2346)
Ouranosinc/xclim: CONTRIBUTING.rst

These options will disable all network calls and skip tests marked with the ``requires_internet`` marker.
The ``--allow-unix-socket`` option is required to allow the `pytest-xdist`_ plugin to function properly.

AI Assistance Notice
--------------------

.. note::

    The following information has been adapted from AI assistance usage policies developed by `Avocado <https://avocado-framework.readthedocs.io/en/latest/guides/contributor/chapters/ai_policy.html>`_ and `ghostty <https://github.com/ghostty-org/ghostty/blob/main/AI_POLICY.md>`_
    with suggestions from the `xclim` developers and maintainers.

The `xclim` developers and maintainers will consider Pull Requests that have been aided by artificial intelligence models, tools, or services.

> For detauled information regarding compliance and operating parameters, refer to the `AI_POLICY.md` and `AGENTS.md` found in the top-level of the code repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For detailed information regarding compliance and operating parameters, refer to the `AI_POLICY.md` and `AGENTS.md` found in the top-level of the code repository.
```

What is AI Assistance ?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Within the context of `xclim` development, AI assistance constitutess any code, code snippets, configurations, documentation, or other programmatic assets produced, suggested, or significantly modified by an artificial intelligence model, tool, or service.

AI assistance can also include code that is heavily adapted from or influenced by outputs from prompts made to generative artificial intelligence models, tools, or services.

Usage Disclosure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you are using any kind of AI assistance while contributing to `xclim`, **this must be disclosed in the pull request**, along with the extent to which AI assistance was used (e.g. docs only vs. code generation).

> If Pull Request responses are being generated by artificial intelligence agents, we ask that you disclose that as well.

Reviewer: Does this mean the comments in the PR thread on github ?

I would personally prefer talking to the human at all times. Can we discourage usage of agents for PR descriptions and comments ? The main issue I see about AI agents in open-source is that an individual comes and drops low-effort slop[^1] that takes a lot of maintainer time to review. Making the interactions themselves seems to me basic decency.

[^1]: "low-effort " as in it didn't take much human time. "slop" : noun, the ouput of generative AI.

Author: For sure, and I agree that I'd rather not be talking directly to someone's AI agent. TBH, I'm not even sure if that's possible, but who knows. This is meant to be a living document so we can add it now and adjust as needed.

These options will disable all network calls and skip tests marked with the ``requires_internet`` marker.
The ``--allow-unix-socket`` option is required to allow the `pytest-xdist`_ plugin to function properly.

AI Assistance Notice
--------------------

.. note::

    The following information has been adapted from AI assistance usage policies developed by `Avocado <https://avocado-framework.readthedocs.io/en/latest/guides/contributor/chapters/ai_policy.html>`_ and `ghostty <https://github.com/ghostty-org/ghostty/blob/main/AI_POLICY.md>`_

>     as well as from the `xclim` developers and maintainers.

Reviewer 2: this sentence sounds a bit weird to me. it sounds like "the info has been adapted from.. the xclim devs"

```suggestion
    with suggestions from the `xclim` developers and maintainers.
```

Author: Good call!

> What is AI Assistance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What is AI Assistance ?
```

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Author: Credit to @juliettelavoie 
```suggestion
What is AI Assistance ?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Within the context of `xclim` development, AI assistance constitutess any code, code snippets, configurations, documentation, or other programmatic assets produced, suggested, or significantly modified by an artificial intelligence model, tool, or service.

AI assistance can also include code that is heavily adapted from or influenced by outputs from prompts made to generative artificial intelligence models, tools, or services.

Usage Disclosure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you are using any kind of AI assistance while contributing to `xclim`, **this must be disclosed in the pull request**, along with the extent to which AI assistance was used (e.g. docs only vs. code generation).
If Pull Request responses are being generated by artificial intelligence agents, we ask that you disclose that as well.
As a small exception, trivial tab-completion doesn't need to be disclosed, so long as it is limited to single keywords or short phrases.

Some example disclosures:

.. admonition:: Pull Request Description

    ### Other information:

>     This PR was primarily written using a combination of OpenClaw (Kimi K2.5) and ChatGPT (GPT-o4-mini)

Reviewer 2: adding a few more examples.
```suggestion
    * This PR was primarily written using a combination of OpenClaw (Kimi K2.5) and ChatGPT (GPT-o4-mini). After using theses tools, I reviewed the content.
    * This PR was primarily written by me with small code snippets copy-pasted from chats with Claude (Sonnet 4.6).
    * I asked GitHub Copilot to clean up and improve code I had written. I went over the final product.
    
```
In AI disclosure of scientific paper, there is often a "and i checked the AI work" sentence at the end.

> .. admonition:: Commit Message

Reviewer 2: so do people need to disclose in the PR or the commit or both ?

IMO, we should only ask for disclosure in the PR and add a specific section in the template.

Author: Ideally, if someone is using prompts based on code reviews to generate new commits, they need to be really clear that that is the case. An effective contributor would not be relying entirely on AI models for all commits, so it would be good to know what portions are being copied from or AI outputs.

I've run into situations where my review comments were being addressed with clearly more auto-generated commits and the ordeal was quite frustrating; The proposer wasn't addressing my comments, but lots of code was being changed between reviews.

Some projects go so far as asking for DCO (`signed-off by: <User> <Email>`) on every commit to ensure that changes can always be attributed to someone. This isn't that far off.

Reviewer: I agree with Juliette that only asking for disclosure in the PR is enough, but we could keep a mention that is it nice to also mention this in commits ?

> clearly more auto-generated commits and the ordeal was quite frustrating; The proposer wasn't addressing my comments

This sounds like a case to use our "reserved right" to reject a PR.

Author: The `assisted-by` line is now mandatory according to the `AGENTS.md` file. Any AI tools that examine the repository and propose changes should add that information by default in the case of generative AI.

I don't think it's a lot to ask for users to mention the tool if they manually use something like ChatGPT.

Reviewer 2: what if somebody coded something without completely reading the AI guidelines first ? we will refuse the PR because they don't have disclaimer at the commit level ?

(also, I think it is pretty annoying to have to do it manually in each commit and people are (I am) likely to forget)

Author: Understandable. I'll see if I can ease this up a little bit.

Again for the more powerful generative models, their commits will have the `assisted-by:` line by nature of the configuration file.

Author: @juliettelavoie Do the recent clarifications work for you?

Reviewer 2: yes good for me thanks !

    Added new indicator for sub-tropical Easter snowstorm events

    Assisted-by: Claude Opus 4.5

Failing to disclose the use of artificial intelligence models, tools, or services is not respectful to the developers and maintainers of software projects.
We ask that contributors are forthcoming with this information so that the effort and scrutiny applied to Pull Request reviews can be adjusted accordingly.

Data Leakage
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Whenever possible, contributors must ensure that they are not reproducing code snippets that have been released under an incompatible license.

> Code generated by artificial intelligence models can sometimes leak training inputs and reasonable actions should be taken to ensure that generated outputs are not reproductions of existing code.

Reviewer 2: what are the reasonable actions  ?
I am not sure how to do what is asked in this section or check that somebody else did.

Author: There are ways to specify to models that they should never reproduce identical outputs to the data that they were trained on. There's also the licensing issue when the training data is knowingly taken from copyleft. This is more a notice to those who train their own agents, but not so much relevant to untrained users of AI assistance.

Code Review
~~~~~~~~~~~

All AI-assisted code contributions must be reviewed by both the human contributor prior to opening the Pull Request as well as by a human reviewer prior to approval and merging to the `main` branch.

Disclaimer
~~~~~~~~~~

The `xclim` maintainers reserve the right to reject Pull Requests and contributions for many different reasons (functionality out-of-scope, code quality issues, non-adherence to code of conduct, etc.)

> and this extends to code that not been adequately disclosed as being assisted by the employment of artificial intelligence models, tools, or services.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and this extends to code that has not been adequately disclosed as being assisted by artificial intelligence models, tools, or services.
```

"being assisted by the employment" sounds like AI 😂)
